When I ask people what they know about the Brahma Kumaris, their responses almost always feature sister Shivani's televised broadcast "Awakening." It is not that they all watch the program on the institution's Peace of Mind TV channel, nor is it that they subscribe to the corresponding channel on YouTube; rather, most access these videos as URLs within WhatsApp messages. In other words, a messaging app has become the primary means by which the Brahma Kumaris reaches new audiences.

That the internet and its affiliated media have come to play a significant role in South Asian religious practice has resulted in the publication of an edited volumes, titled _Digital Hinduism_, in 2020 [1]. Its contributors attest to the impact that websites, apps, and social media platforms have on lived Hinduism, and they suggest that any study of contemporary religion must account for the interface between online and offline spaces. I propose an investigation of the Brahma Kumaris and the Gayatri Pariwar, two religious institutions that have been underrepresented in the study of Hinduism, as case studies with which to reflect on and respond to scholarly analysis of "digital Hinduism."

Drawing on ethnographic fieldwork conducted in 2019-2020, I offer an analysis of three facets of digital religious practice in order to demonstrate the instrumentality of online media in the negotiation and production of religious identity and community. I begin with an overview of the range of religious products offered by each institution via websites and social media platforms. Following Vineet Sinha [2], I argue that the digital and material goods marketed online do more than fill consumer needs; rather, these offerings forge new expectations for participation in their respective communities. For example, the "Om Shanti Stickers" app offered on the Google Play Store not only offers Brahma Kumaris the means to add institutionally approved flair to their WhatsApp conversations, but also sets a new norm for participation in online environments.

Following this survey is an ethnographic consideration of the production and upkeep of both online resources and the digital realms in which people access them. Although these are major endeavors, the toils of the individuals who make and maintain digital media have yet to receive adequate scholarly attention. Dedicated IT departments staffed with numerous workers and volunteers exist at both Brahma Kumaris and Gayatri Pariwar headquarters. The testimony of these laborers regarding the meaning of their work, although perhaps predictable, demonstrates that the development of online infrastructure has transformed not only the physical spaces of contemporary religious institutions -- which must now accommodate numerous computers, servers, and even recording studios -- but also what it means to participate in such institutions.

These characterizations of the supply side of digital religion set the stage for an engagement with the ways that ordinary members of contemporary religious institutions engage with their communities, both online and offline. In particular, I argue that WhatsApp and Facebook enable the digitalized performance of piety by the members of the Brahma Kumaris and Gayatri Pariwar. On WhatsApp, early morning exchanges of the typical Brahma Kumari greeting "Om Shanti" have a triple valence. First, these messages signal to others that one has woken up for the day's 4:00 a.m. meditation, a practice strongly recommended to Brahma Kumaris by community leaders. Second, the expectation of reciprocation serves as an informal policing of the community: those that do not respond may be presumed asleep. Third, and following Nicole Karapanagiotis [3], these messages function as "automatic rituals," spreading the power believed to be embedded within the phrase "Om Shanti" to all who chance to see the message.

Similarly, Facebook posts and comments allow users in each organization to relate their religious experiences with others on a highly visible online forum. In addition to the sorts of exchanges that Aparajita De and Rajib Nandi [4] detail in their study on WhatsApp groups in West Bengal, which focus primarily on the moments leading up to and during religious events, Facebook affords members of the Gayatri Pariwar and Brahma Kumaris the ability to reflect on recent religious experiences as a community. Especially in the context of "pilgrimages" to institutional headquarters, Facebook photo albums work as narratives of religious growth for others to view and affirm.

Finally, these digital media are only ever a few taps away on a smartphone, which render mobile devices key instruments of religious practice. In the limited context of their interactions with one foreign ethnographer, members of the Brahma Kumaris and Gayatri Pariwar have often turned to their smartphones as anchors that steer attention back to "what matters." Whether exhibiting a YouTube video about the importance of the Gayatri Mantra or interrupting a conversation in order to remind its Brahma Kumari user to meditate, the smartphone has become an important interface between digital religion and the material world.

In sum, the widening availability of digital and material goods for consumption via apps, websites, and social media platforms bears consequences for contemporary religious institutions and their constituents in South Asia. Namely, groups such as the Brahma Kumaris and Gayatri Pariwar face new supply-side requirements in order to offer digital media to their members, and dedicated departments have been created in their headquarters in order to meet them. The resulting supply of new online resources in turn creates new imaginations of what proper religious practice ought to be. Social media platforms in particular have become sites where piety is articulated and negotiated through image and text (and now emoji), while the smartphone has transformed into a staple accessory for participation in religious communities.

Notes:

1. Xenia Zeiler, ed., _Digital Hinduism_, Routledge Studies in Religion and Digital Culture (Abingdon, Oxon ; New York, NY: Routledge, 2019).
2. Vineeta Sinha, “The Internet: A New Marketplace for Transacting Pūjā Items,” in _Digital Hinduism_, 2019.
3. Nicole Karapanagiotis, “Automatic Rituals and Inadvertent Audiences: ISKCON, Krishna and the Ritual Mechanics of Facebook,” in _Digital Hinduism_, 2019.
4. Aparajita De and Rajib Nandi, “Whats(up) with Hinduism? Digital Culture and Religion Among Bengali Hindus,” in _Digital Hinduism_, 2019.
