No records remain of Mozoomdar's correspondence with Saudamini after his
departure from Chicago. One reason for this, and also perhaps for his
feeling "numb and absent-minded," is that Mozoomdar's health declined
rapidly during the course of his three-week stay there. By the close of
the World's Parliament of Religions, PCM was diagnosed with diabetes and
forbidden to work. Yet his sense of duty to his divine task both forbade
him from heeding his doctor's advice and prevented him from writing home
about his condition [@bose-1927-LifeProtapChunder, 185.].

Mozoomdar surely felt pressure to perform well at the World's Parliament
of Religions, not only to justify his travel to the West, but also to
validate his hopes that the New Dispensation could flourish there. It is
to his credit that little of PCM's personal problems surface among his
speeches in Chicago [This is not to say that his failing health was lost to his
    friends. Correspondence between John Henry Barrows and Jenkin Lloyd
    Jones indicates that the latter believed Mozoomdar would soon
    succumb to Bright's Disease. See @jones-1893-Dec151893, 403.]. Accounts of his addresses depict Mozoomdar at
his best. For example, the Christian Register, a Boston paper edited by
John Henry Barrows, the chief organizer of the World's Parliament of
Religions, proclaimed:

> No voice commanded more attention or more sympathy at the Parliament of
Religions than that of the prophet of the Brahmo-Somaj. Upon no one in
the Pentecostal gathering did the cloven tongue of fire more surely rest
\[than on\] Mr. Mozoomdar [@mozoomdar-1893-BabuProtapChunder, 80.].

Further evidence rests in the transcriptions of his speeches, though it
is beyond the scope of this exhibition to detail these parliament
lectures. Rather, this chronicle has been meant to provide the intimate
and seldom-considered details of PCM's hopes, fears, and experiences
during his sojourn from Kolkata to Chicago. Mozoomdar was eager to
travel yet homesick, publicly ebullient yet privately ill, anxious of
failure yet inspired by God. This personal context, much more than the
history of British colonialism or even the controversies of Keshub Sen,
holds the key to understanding most fully his addresses in Chicago and
his broader religious vision.
