## Introduction

I am an ethnographer of Religion. I don't want to advocate for new policies or test the efficacy of what I observe in my research. Instead, I want to describe what contemporary religious institutions in India do, understand what is important to their practitioners, and to think through what all of this can teach us about the relationship between religion and other aspects of life in India today.

Today I'll be sharing some of my work on the Brahma Kumaris and the Gayatri Pariwar, two religious institutions especially popular in North India. You might be wondering what any of this has to do with Public Health, so I will tell you now that each of these groups offers several types of products, services, and ritual procedures that they believe not only keep you physically healthy, but also have the potential to keep the world turning properly. I hope after hearing a little about my work with these groups, we can have a conversation about the potential differences and overlaps between religious and public health initiatives. Since I don't know how familiar you are with these groups, I want to begin with a little storytelling.

## Two Divine Visitations

It is Vasant Panchami in 1926, in a village twenty-five kilometers northeast of Agra. A fifteen-year-old boy named Ram Sharma sits in meditation when he is overcome by the vision of a naked rishi shrouded in Himalayan snow. The youth has recently gone through his _upanāyana_ ceremony, and no other than Madan Mohan Malaviya initiated him into the practice of chanting the Gayatri Mantra. Now, however, the boy is seated before a guru of a different sort. The sage instructs Ram Sharma to adhere to three commandments. First, he must carry out a twenty-four-year resolution to chant twenty-four lakh Gayatri Mantras twenty four times (a total of 576 lakhs). Second, he must keep an oil lamp continuously lit. Third, he must undertake several Himalayan pilgrimages to receive further instructions from this astral guru. This is the founding narrative of the Gayatri Pariwar, a reformed Hindu organization with a mission to usher in a new Satya Yuga through personal and societal transformation.

As you might expect, chanting the Gayatri Mantra is central to this organization's daily religious practice. In fact, members believe that the vibrations which emanate from the twenty-four _akṣara_ sequence of the Gayatri Mantra has the power to purify oneself and one's surroundings. This meditative practice is paired with daily _havan_ ceremonies. Again, practitioners believe that the particular combination of burning _sāmagrī_, _deśī_ ghee, and chanting Sanskrit mantras will chemically and ritually purify the environment. The purifying power of these fire rites increases exponentially with scale, for which reason the Gayatri Pariwar regularly offers "_mahāyajñas_" ranging from five to 1000 _havan kuṇḍs_. Although Acharya Ram Sharma died in 1991, his son-in-law, an allopathic doctor named Pranav Pandya, now manages the organization. Before he held this administrative post, Pandya conducted a series of experiments in which he measured the antiseptic qualities of the smoke emitted by _havan kuṇḍs_.

In 1936, a decade after Ram Sharma's experience, a diamond merchant living in what is now Hyderabad, Pakistan, received a series of visions of God. The man, called Dada Lekhraj by his friends and neighbors, saw a horrifying sequence of missiles, fire, and death in his vision. This carnage occurred at the same time as a vision of a Shiva jyotirlingam, and Dada Lekhraj experienced the realization that he was staring at no other than the approaching destruction of the world at the will of the supreme God [@Chander-1983-AdiDevFirst, 37]. In another vision several weeks later, he experienced a powerful presence enter into his body, showing him visions of a new heavenly realm and communicating to him that he was to create such a world [@Chander-1983-AdiDevFirst, 42]. From that moment on, Dada Lekhraj understood himself to be the human vessel of God's will to prepare the world for the apocalyptic transition from the Kali Yuga to the Satya Yuga. After abandoning his diamond business, Dada Lekhraj began to gather a following of primarily female disciples, which eventually came to be known as the Brahma Kumaris.

Similarly to the Gayatri Pariwar, the Brahma Kumaris look forward to a new Satya Yuga. They adhere to celibacy and vegetarianism, and undertake daily meditative practice. Unlike the Gayatri Pariwar, who identify the power of meditation in the vibrations of the Gayatri Mantra, the Brahma Kumaris believe that by visualizing God in his true form as a point of light, they can connect their souls to that light and recharge them, in much the same was as someone charges a cellphone battery by plugging it into an outlet. Similarly to the Gayatri Pariwar, Brahma Kumaris believe that meditating collectively exponentially increases the energy they take from God. They dedicate the third Sunday evening of every month to a synchronous meditation worldwide, which is supposed to spread healing vibrations to everyone on the planet. Although Dada Lekhraj died in 1968, the institution currently has two charismatic figureheads. The current leader, called Dadi Janki, is 104 years old, and her vitality is often attributed to her ability to be continuously "charged" in remembrance of God. Much younger and arguably more famous, Sister Shivani is the hostess of the TV program "Awakening with the Brahma Kumaris," on which she dispenses lifestyle advice and self-help tips.

Before going further, I want to list off several of the other health and healing-related practices undertaken by both groups. The Gayatri Pariwar, especially at its Haridwar campus, manufactures and sells a variety of products that use cow byproducts: shampoo, massage oil, tooth powder, soap, etc. They also host regular Panchkarma-based naturopathic retreats, especially at a shrine located at Ram Sharma's birthplace in UP. Although the Brahma Kumaris do not manufacture many products, they do have a full-fledged hospital at Mount Abu, which is staffed with doctors trained in allopathic, ayurvedic, and other medical traditions. Of particular note is a spiritual counseling office staffed by a psychologist trained in psychotherapy and a Brahma Kumaris psychological course called VIHASA, which stands for "Values In Healthcare: A Spiritual Approach." I'd be happy to talk more afterwards about the other health-related activities that both institutions operate.

### Energy in the Gayatri Pariwar

Although these are brief and incomplete introductions, I will now shift to a discussion of "energy" and "vibrations" as motifs found in the Gayatri Pariwar and Brahma Kumaris. I argue that these concepts serve as the logical foundations of their organizational practices. They are the forces which explain why the rites of each group "work." Regarding the Gayatri Pariwar, I have three brief anecdotes to share with you that deal with the idea of "energy." Each of these were conversations I had at Shantikunj Ashram in Haridwar this February, which is the current headquarters of the Gayatri Pariwar.

The first conversation was with Dr. Chinmay Pandya, the son of the current head of the Gayatri Pariwar and vice-chancellor of the affiliated Dev Sanskriti Vishwavidyalaya. I asked him whether there was a scientific basis for the frequent statements I heard from pilgrims that the Shantikunj ashram had a special _mahaul_, or atmosphere. He responded by telling me that there was no scientific way to prove such a thing, because there is a distinction between the words _paryāvaraṇ_ and _vātāvaraṇ_:

> If you sit near your mother and hug her and then hug a random person then there will be a difference. But how would you prove that? In Hindi the concept is that we have two words, _paryāvaraṇ_ and _vātāvaraṇ_ --  _paryāvaraṇ_ that you are able to see, _vātāvaraṇ_ that you can't see but you can feel. So we can say that the _vātāvaraṇ_ of a certain place will change based upon the energy (_ūrjā_) found there. The feel of a library will seem different to us than the feel in this room. You would feel differently.... But what happens according to belief, I don't think it can be proven with science, unless there is some scientific equipment -- which there is not, to my knowledge -- which can check the _vātāvaraṇ_ of a place. Then it would probably be a good idea to try.

I followed up by asking Chinmay whether the widely held belief that the Gayatri Pariwar's fire rites purify the atmosphere might account for this special _mahaul_, and he responded by saying that yes that is the very case:

>But I was saying, in response to your question of whether it could be explained through science, that it was not possible. If you ask the cause (of the difference), it is just that, that in the places where Gurudev did his austerities, in which places millions of [Gayatri mantras] are chanted, where so much _yajña_ happens, so many rites of passage happen, where people go with pure feelings, it (the _vātāvaraṇ_) changes.

For Chinmay then, an immeasurable energy affecting an unobservable _vātāvaraṇ_ varies based on a variety of ritual practices, which explains why certain environments are believed to feel more peaceful, pure, or important. Interestingly, he places these phenomenon in the realm of belief as opposed to science, which suggests a working distinction between science and belief as that between observable phenomena versus 'feelings.'

The second conversation took place at one of the ashram's canteens on a late morning. I met a psychology PhD student named Shraddha, and we spoke for a time about different aspects of the Gayatri Pariwar. She had come to the ashram for a host of reasons: to regain her composure after a failed marriage, to ask permission to conduct a comparative study of different types of meditation conducted by members the Gayatri Pariwar, and to apply for a teaching position at the neighboring university. At one point in our conversation I brought up the idea of vibrations myself, hoping she would have something to add. She told me that one of the primary things that Acharya Ram Sharma propounded was a cleansing of one's thoughts and mind. She referred to this as a process of freeing ourselves of the burdens of our unconscious, and she specifically cited Freud when doing so. Reciting the Gayatri Mantra was one way of doing this, she said. A short time later in our conversation, I brought up the fact that I saw several people staring at the sun, chanting the Gayatri Mantra in the early morning. This prompted her to tell me that it is important to wake up early because those same morning hours are when the Himalayan Rishis awake to do their meditations. She described that the Gayatri Pariwar holds the Himalayas as a storehouse of energy through which all of the positive change wrought by the Gayatri Pariwar can be accomplished.

An almost identical sentiment was conveyed to me during a third conversation. My interlocutor was Sowmya, an employee of the cow-byproduct manufacturing facility who had been tasked with the operation of the associated storefront at Shantikunj. Seated in the back of the store on a stool, I asked Sowmya about himself. In between helping customers with their purchases, Sowmya related to me his life story, telling me how he had gone to the Himalayas in order to die. Unhappy with the material world and disillusioned about guru bhakti, Sowmya set out for Gangotri, believing that to die at the mouth of the Ganges would grant him permanent liberation. Sowmya had climbed to great heights in the mountains, set up a small shelter under a wedge-shaped boulder, tore his dhoti in two to use as a wind-block at the mouth of his stone lean-to, and tried to sleep. He claimed that there was such a frightening wind and such intense cold that he faced death itself.

Sowmya then said he awoke, a full six months later, in a shelter, where he was being cared for by strangers. He has no memory of those prior six months. But he had to learn everything all over again -- how to speak, how to write, how the world works. He then raised his hand close to my face, and rubbing the skin, he explained that his austerities had left their traces on his body. See? My skin is pockmarked and prematurely wrinkled, scarred from the cold. He was dressed in a brown hooded sweatshirt and leather jacket, and at that moment pulled down his hood, revealing thin wisps of hair. He then fingered his teeth, explaining that most had either fallen or become quite loose due to the trauma of the experience. He is undergoing operations now to fix all of this, yet he is only 29 years old.

Sowmya ended his life story in the present, explaining how he returns to the Himalayas every three months or so to replenish his energy:

>They call me Himalaya Babu because I am crazy. I am crazy in all subjects but religion, which I know in and out. But it is not as if I can repeat myself over and over -- no! Once I explain it, it is gone, finished. Then I have to go and take energy from the Himalayas. There is so much energy accumulated there! Before it was here as well, but that was long ago, before all of these cars and radio waves. Now you have to go to the Himalayas to experience that energy. It is like a phone server, you know? Once you run out, you have to return to the source to replenish it.

For these three members of the Gayatri Pariwar, at least, "energy" works as an index of both the feel of a place and of one's personal state of being. It is also the substrate which allows the Gayatri Pariwar and its members to accomplish their spiritual and social goals. I will now turn to the Brahma Kumaris and the idea of "vibrations" as a similar force.

## Vibrations in the Brahma Kumaris

Since my initial conversations with members of the Brahma Kumaris, reference has consistently been made to vibrations as the link between personal and societal transformation. I understand the use of the word to be in part an appeal to science, citation of scripture, and perhaps an attempt to connect with the sensibilities of a foreign interlocutor seen as a potential new convert. The meaning behind it, however, connects with the importance placed on the purification of the self, which both creates and is created by a suitable _mahaul_, or environment.

Every evening, Brahma Kumaris centers host an hour of silent Rajyoga meditation, most often accompanied by music. On one such occasion in Mathura, about twenty people were seated in the room, either on the padded floor or on plastic chairs, and for the most part it was silent (one member tried playing some music from her cellphone, but was gently requested to turn it off). At the end of the hour, Manju Behan, a regular attendee who sits right up front during daily morning classes, took a seat at the head of the room and asked us whether we enjoyed the experience: "Wasn't it wonderful, sitting in silence? Could you feel each other's vibrations?"

The very next day, I made my way to another Brahma Kumaris center in Mathura, tucked away in a gully within earshot of the Jama Masjid but in the immediate shadow of a Digambar Jain temple. The modest, one-room BK center cannot be more than ten-by-fifteen feet in area, but it is sufficient for the ten or so regulars that listen to early-evening sermons given by Mamta Didi, a robust woman in a black-patterned Sari. Reading the speech from her phone, Mamta spoke to the group about vibrations and about how they even played a role in my sitting before them:

>Baba says that till the last hour we can perform mental service for others. You might be physically sick, but you can still give the vibrations of good thoughts to others.... You are able to show others the power of your subtle wellbeing through your eyes and face. [Indicating me]: Someone has come to meet you. Having met you, he will think, 'wow there's something there -- a really good feeling.' Just like I was really surprised when he met me -- without asking anyone 'who's sister Mamta,' he approached me directly and I thought, 'how did he recognize me?'.... He's Baba's child, right? There's a feeling of affinity.

Mamta had inserted talk of vibrations into the _murlī_ in order to describe our felicitous meeting, but "vibrations" is also part of the Brahma Kumaris' scriptural vocabulary. According to the text of the day's sermon, "the power of resolve means that even while sitting still you can create an atmosphere (_vāyumaṇḍal_) all around you through your vibrations, via your mind."

A similar sentiment was the topic of a speech given by Sister Shivani at the 38^th annual "Mind-Body Medicine" conference held at Mount Abu, Rajasthan in September. A refrain during the conference was that allopathic doctors, who made up the bulk of the audience, can only effect healing by first caring after themselves. To this end, they were enjoined to purify themselves after the model of the Brahma Kumaris -- at the very least, they were encouraged to do Rajayoga, the Brahma Kumaris brand of meditation. Sister Shivani referred to this process as "becoming angels." The first mention made of such a process occurred during the first of BK Shivani's five talks at the Mind-Body Medicine Conference. Although I could not attend this session, I was easily able to locate it online. Recorded on September 6 but posted to YouTube on September 20, 2019, the video had in three weeks been viewed over 26,000 times.^["03 Caring is Healing  BK Shivani 06 09 2019," YouTube, accessed October 10, 2019, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-HrRPXmTuYY&t=1576s.] A third of the way through her talk, during a guided meditation, Shivani spoke on behalf of her listeners: "I am a walking radiator of power.... I am an angel for all of [my patients]. 'Doctor' is my profession: I am an angel for them." Shivani described meditative practice as a type of mental programming by which means the doctors would be able to return changed to their hospitals at the end of the conference.

What type of change does becoming an angel entail? According to Shivani, "[being an] Angel means [being the] master of [one's] life, not a victim to people or situations." She went on to describe how everyone is responsible for their own reaction to a set of circumstances, and that the "high or low vibrations" of various emotions radiate outward from individuals, affecting others. Since those in the audience were doctors, Shivani enjoined them to purify their thoughts, feelings, words, and behavior so that their hospitals could become not just places of treatment, but places of true _healing_. The process? Rajayoga meditation. At the close of her talk, Shivani led the group in another guided meditation (the third in ninety minutes): "I am an angel... God's angel for the world.... Imagine yourselves in your hospitals. I am an angel of God, [the] highest vibration energy field. [I have] only one intention: to give, to give, to give. Give to everyone." As mentioned in several Facebook posts and oral testimonials by doctors who attended the event, this Brahma Kumaris conference was a venue that enabled people to make themselves divine.

Vibrations are at once a reflection of one's inner state, the medium by which that inner state is communicated to others, and thus an instrument for the creation of an atmosphere. They are a fitting concept with which to tie together the Brahma Kumaris' simultaneous efforts to purify themselves and the world around them. As food for thought, and as a way to close, I want to direct your attention to this portrait hung just outside of an auditorium at one of the Brahma Kumaris campuses on Mount Abu. On it you can see most of what I have shared with you so far about the Brahma Kumaris: Dada Lekhraj's profile looks across at a doubled vision: he sees God in front of a tranquil cityscape and the destruction of the world happening beneath. His soul -- figured as a point of light in his head -- is connected to a higher point of light representing the supreme _nirākār_ God. And how is it connected? Rays and vibrations emanate from his soul. The crown panel is also interesting, for we see angels as cherubim -- usually a Christian representation. Note how they too have energy of some sort trailing behind them, representing their connectedness with the divine.

## Toward Discussion

To sum up what I've shared with you thus far, and to lead us toward a discussion about how to think about these religious institutions and their initiatives through the lens of Public Health, I see two major takeaways. First and foremost, attention to energy and vibrations is key to understanding the doubled projects of both the Gayatri Pariwar and Brahma Kumaris, which at once aim to serve individuals and society at large. To these organizations, self-help, self-healing, self-purification, are very much related to the ability to help, heal, and purify one's surroundings and society. The link between the individual body and the environment (which I read as a proxy for society at large and even the "age" or _yuga_) is the connective property of energy and vibrations. To the degree that positive and purifying energy can be transferred from a source to a target, and to the degree that one's own state of being can travel to and affect others in by way of vibrations, the projects of self-transformation and social transformation are in fact one.

The second takeaway, and which I have really only hinted, is the utility of manufactured goods and services as the instruments of transferring energy or creating vibrations. Here are a few photographs of trinkets that are sold at the institutional centers of each organization and which are meant to aid people in their personal religious lives. I want to point out that most of these items appear decorative -- an item for a household shrine, a nightlight, a small music box. Yet they are used to create a certain type of religious environment, which in turn is understood to help them cultivate and spread a certain type of energy or vibration.
